[FLINK-26125][docs][table] Add new documentation for the CAST changes in 1.15 (#18813)
apache/flink: docs/content/docs/dev/table/types.md

{{< /tab >}}
{{< /tabs >}}

Casting
-------

Flink SQL can perform casting between a defined tuple `from` type and `target` type. 

> While some casting operations can always succeed no matter the input value, others can fail at runtime, 

Author: Not sure what you mean, can you suggest some wording? I added something to the next sentence

> While some casting operations can always succeed no matter the input value, others can fail at runtime, 

Reviewer: What you have added sounds good, thx!

| `RAW`                                  |                   Y                   |                    !                     |     N     |     N     |     N     |     N      |     N     |    N     |    N    |    N     |   N    |   N    |      N      |        N        |     N      |    N    |     N      |   N   |   N   |  Y⁴   |      N       |
| `STRUCTURED`                           |                   Y                   |                    N                     |     N     |     N     |     N     |     N      |     N     |    N     |    N    |    N     |   N    |   N    |      N      |        N        |     N      |    N    |     N      |   N   |   N   |   N   |      !³      |

1. All the casting to constant length or variable length will also trim and pad accordingly to the type definition.
2. `TO_TIMESTAMP` and `TO_TIMESTAMP_LTZ` must be used instead of `CAST`/`TRY_CAST`.

> 3. Supported iff the children type tuples are supported. Fallible iff the children type tuples are fallible.

Author: yep

{{< /tab >}}
{{< /tabs >}}

Casting
-------

> Flink SQL can perform casting between a defined pair `from` type and `target` type pair. While some

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Flink SQL can perform casting between a defined `from` type pair and `target` type pair. While some
```

Author: > defined `from` type pair and `target` type pair

This doesn't make sense, as it's one pair `(from, target)`. This wording sounds like there are two pairs, one called `from` and the other called `target`

Reviewer 2: That's then the confusing part for me because it has `pair` twice in the original sentence. So we could completely omit `pair` and say something like ```Flink Table API and SQL can perform casting between a defined `from` type and `target` type.```  ? Or ```Flink Table API and SQL can perform casting between a defined `from` type and `target` type pair.```

Author: Ok will remove the pair once for all then :) check now

> Flink SQL can perform casting between a defined pair `from` type and `target` type. While some
> casting operations can always succeed no matter the input value, others can fail at runtime, that
> is, for some input values there is no way to create a value for the target type. For example, it's
> always possible to convert `INT` to `STRING`, but viceversa is not true, as you can provide an
> input `STRING` which cannot be converted to `INT`, like `'abc'`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Flink SQL can perform casting between a defined `from` type and `target` type pair. While some
casting operations can always succeed regardless of the input value, others can fail at runtime 
(i.e. when there is no way to create a value for the target type). For example, it is always possible
to convert `INT` to `STRING`, but you can provide an input `STRING` which cannot be converted 
to `INT`.
```

Author: I modified a bit the last sentence, check it out

> During the planning stage, Flink SQL rejects queries for invalid cast input and target type with

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
During the planning stage, Flink Table API and SQL rejects queries for invalid cast input and target type with
```

Author: check above comment

a `ValidationException`, e.g. when trying to cast a `TIMESTAMP` to an `INTERVAL`.

> While for valid type pairs that can fail at runtime Flink SQL accepts them, but requires the user to correctly handle failures.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Valid type pairs that can fail at runtime will be accepted by Flink SQL, but requires the user to correctly handle failures.
```

Author: Repeating every time _Table API and SQL_ is a bit exagerated imo, i used _query validator_ instead.

> to handle manually cases where a cast pair is valid, but can fail at runtime.

Author: > for invalid pairs-to-be-casted that throw a `ValidationException`

I changed this to:

> for invalid cast input and target type with a `ValidationException`

As it's flink that rejects the input and target types with a `ValidationException`, and not the pair that itself rejects. Makes sense?

Also modified the next sentence. check it out

> In Flink SQL, casting can be performed by using one of the two following built-in functions:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Flink Table API and SQL, casting can be performed by using one of the two following built-in functions:
```

> In Flink SQL casting can be performed using one of the two following built-in functions:
> 
> * `CAST`: The regular cast function defined by the SQL standard. It can fail the job if the cast operation is fallible and the provided input is not valid. The type inference will preserve the nullability of the input type.
> * `TRY_CAST`: An extension to the regular cast function which returns `NULL` in case the cast operation fails. Its return type is always nullable.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In Flink SQL, casting can be performed by using one of the two following built-in functions:

* `CAST`: The regular cast function defined by the SQL standard. It can fail the job if the cast operation is fallible and the provided input is not valid. The type inference will preserve the nullability of the input type.
* `TRY_CAST`: An extension to the regular cast function which returns `NULL` in case the cast operation fails. Its return type is always nullable.
```

| `ROW`                                  |                   Y                   |                    N                     |     N     |     N     |     N     |     N      |     N     |    N     |    N    |    N     |   N    |   N    |      N      |        N        |     N      |    N    |     N      |   N   |  !³   |      N       |   N   |
| `STRUCTURED`                           |                   Y                   |                    N                     |     N     |     N     |     N     |     N      |     N     |    N     |    N    |    N     |   N    |   N    |      N      |        N        |     N      |    N    |     N      |   N   |   N   |      !³      |   N   |
| `RAW`                                  |                   Y                   |                    !                     |     N     |     N     |     N     |     N      |     N     |    N     |    N    |    N     |   N    |   N    |      N      |        N        |     N      |    N    |     N      |   N   |   N   |      N       |  Y⁴   |

> 1. All the casting to constant length or variable length will also trim and pad accordingly to the type definition.
> 2. `TO_TIMESTAMP` and `TO_TIMESTAMP_LTZ` must be used instead of `CAST`/`TRY_CAST`.
> 3. Supported iff the children type pairs are supported. Fallible iff the children type pairs are fallible.
> 4. Supported iff the `RAW` class and serializer are equals.
> 5. Supported iff `INTERVAL` is a `MONTH TO YEAR` range.
> 5. Supported iff `INTERVAL` is a `DAY TO TIME` range.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following rules are also applicable:

1. All the casting to constant length or variable length will also trim and pad accordingly to the type definition.
2. `TO_TIMESTAMP` and `TO_TIMESTAMP_LTZ` must be used instead of `CAST`/`TRY_CAST`.
3. Supported iff the children type pairs are supported. Fallible iff the children type pairs are fallible.
4. Supported iff the `RAW` class and serializer are equals.
5. Supported iff `INTERVAL` is a `MONTH TO YEAR` range.
6. Supported iff `INTERVAL` is a `DAY TO TIME` range.
```

Author: I don't think the sentence fit, as these are notes to the above table, not "additional rules"

Reviewer 2: Then I would add something like "Note:" there, else the list just comes out of the blue without context.

Reviewer 2: Also, don't forget that you have 5 listed twice in the table ;)

> 4. Supported iff the `RAW` class and serializer are equals
> 5. Supported iff `INTERVAL` is a `MONTH TO YEAR` range
> 5. Supported iff `INTERVAL` is a `DAY TO TIME` range

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
4. Supported iff the `RAW` class and serializer are equals.
5. Supported iff `INTERVAL` is a `MONTH TO YEAR` range.
5. Supported iff `INTERVAL` is a `DAY TO TIME` range.
```

| `RAW`                                  |                   Y                   |                    !                     |     N     |     N     |     N     |     N      |     N     |    N     |    N    |    N     |   N    |   N    |      N      |        N        |     N      |    N    |     N      |   N   |   N   |      N       |  Y⁴   |

Notes:

1. All the casting to constant length or variable length will also trim and pad accordingly to the type definition.
2. `TO_TIMESTAMP` and `TO_TIMESTAMP_LTZ` must be used instead of `CAST`/`TRY_CAST`.
3. Supported iff the children type pairs are supported. Fallible iff the children type pairs are fallible.
4. Supported iff the `RAW` class and serializer are equals.
5. Supported iff `INTERVAL` is a `MONTH TO YEAR` range.
6. Supported iff `INTERVAL` is a `DAY TO TIME` range.

Also note that a cast of a `NULL` value will always return `NULL`, 
regardless of whether the function used is `CAST` or `TRY_CAST`.

### Legacy casting

Pre Flink 1.15 casting behaviour can be enabled by setting `table.exec.legacy-cast-behaviour` to `enabled`.

> In Flink 1.15 this flag is enabled by default.

Reviewer: @MartijnVisser @slinkydeveloper We need to change this, and also below in the hint.

Casting
-------

Flink SQL can perform casting between a defined pair `from` type and `target` type. 
While some casting operations can always succeed no matter the input value, others can fail at runtime, 
that is, for some input values there is no way to create a value for the target type.
For example, it's always possible to convert `INT` to `STRING`, but viceversa is not true, 
as you can provide an input `STRING` which cannot be converted to `INT`, like `'abc'`.

> Flink SQL during planning rejects queries which cast pairs are invalid with a `ValidationException`, 

Reviewer: `Flink SQL, during planning, rejects....` (add the 2 commas)

### Legacy casting

Pre Flink 1.15 casting behaviour can be enabled by setting `table.exec.legacy-cast-behaviour` to `enabled`.

> In Flink 1.1 this flag is enabled by default.

Reviewer: `Flink 1.15`
